# numident_paper
numident paper 

The Numerical Identification System (Numident) forms the backbone of the U.S. Social Security Administration’s record keeping system. For every person with a Social Security number, the Numident tracks claims status, date of birth (and, if applicable, death), as well as other background information including birthplace, race, sex, and names of parents. In 2013, the Social Security Administration transferred a large portion of their Numident records to the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). The public release of these records in 2019, which we call "NARA Numident," offers nearly complete coverage of those who died from 1988 to 2005. In this paper, we describe the contents of the publicly available records, introduce a cleaned and harmonized version of the data, and show how the records can be used for the study of mortality in the United States. 

The NARA Numident is an individual-level dataset covering over 49 million people who have died. In addition to individual identifiers, NARA Numident includes information on race, sex, birthplace, ZIP Code of residence at the time of death, and administrative variables, such as a person's age when they submitted their first Social Security application and their total number of Social Security applications. There are no direct measures of socioeconomic status in the NARA Numident. To overcome this, the records can be linked using such individual identifiers to obtain income and education covariates [@goldstein_censoc_2019]. Identifiers include Social Security numbers as well as names, birthplaces, and dates of birth. The death coverage is nearly complete for deaths to persons age 65+ for the window of 1988-2005. 

The public release of the NARA Numident makes it one of the first administrative data sets on mortality that can be used by all researchers. Previously, Social Security Numident records have been used to study mortality by researchers employed by the Social Security Administration (e.g. [@waldron_trends_2007]) or collaborating with SSA researchers (e.g [@mehta_life_2016]). Researchers using restricted access IRS data have also carried out mortality research [@chetty_association_2016]. Our hope is that the public availability of this data will encourage more mortality research using administrative records, enhance the replicability and debate about results, and open up new avenues of research.

Administrative data offers several advantages for the study of mortality. The large sample sizes enable the comparison of ages, birth cohorts, small subpopulations, and small geographic areas. The large sample sizes also enable the study of mortality at the oldest ages, when there are only a few survivors. An additional advantage is that the public nature of the NARA Numident means that individual identifiers can be used to link to other data with covariates of mortality. Since there are no restrictions on the use of this public data, researchers can also link records to their own restricted data sets.

The NARA Numident records pose a challenge for mortality estimation. Because the data set includes only those who have died, there is no measure of survivorship. Traditional statistical methods relying on exposure to risk are not appropriate. Instead, one needs to use methods that rely on the distribution of deaths by age within cohorts. We discuss these methods below and provide examples of their use.

The methods we provide here are also useful for researchers working with the Social Security Death Master File (DMF), another publicly available data resource for mortality research. The DMF was first made available in 1988 and is extracted quarterly from the Numident [@hill_social_2001]. The file has been used by some researchers to study mortality, particularly at older ages [@gavrilov_mortality_2012]. While the DMF has high death coverage for the wider window of 1975 to 2005, it lacks most of the covariates available in the NARA Numident records [@hill_social_2001]. 

We are also in the process of linking both the DMF and the NARA Numident records to the full-count 1940 Census, to create a rich, publicly linked administrative dataset for the study of mortality [@goldstein_censoc_2019].
